Stephen Covey has written a remarkable book about the human condition, so elegantly
written, so understanding of our embedded concerns, so useful for our organization and
personal lives, that it's going to be my gift to everyone I know.
-- Warren Bennis, author of On Becoming a Leader
I've never known any teacher or mentor on improving personal effectiveness to generate
such an Overwhelmingly positive reaction.... This book captures beautifully Stephen's
philosophy of principles. I think anyone reading it will quickly understand the enormous
reaction I and others have had to Dr.Covey's teachings.
-- John Pepper, President, Procter and Gamble
Stephen Covey is an American Socrates, opening your mind to the 'permanent things' --
values, family, relationships, communicating.
-- Brian Tracy, author of Psychology of Achievement
Stephen R. Covey's book teaches with power, conviction, and feeling. Both the content
and the methodology of these principles form a solid foundation for effective
communication. As an educator, I think this book to be a significant addition to my
library.
-- William Rolfe Kerr, Utah Commissioner of Higher Education
Few students of management and organization -- and people -- have thought as long and
hard about first principles as Stephen Covey. In The Seven Habits of Highly Effective
People, he offers us an opportunity, not a how-to guide. The opportunity is to explore our
impact and ourselves on others, and to do so by taking advantage of his profound
insights. It is a wonderful book that could change your life.
-- Tom Peters, author of In Search of Excellence
The ethical basis for human relations in this book defines a way of life, not just a
methodology for succeeding at business. That it works is apparent.
-- Bruce L. Christensen, President, Public Broadcasting Service
At a time when American organizations desperately need to energize people and
produce leaders at all levels, Covey provides an empowering philosophy for life that is
also the best guarantee of success in business...a perfect blend of wisdom, compassion,
and practical experience.
-- Rosabeth Moss Kanter, editor of the Harvard Business Review and author of When
Giants Learn to Dance
I have learned so much from Stephen Covey over the years that every time I sit down to
write, I'm worried about subconscious plagiarism! Seven Habits is not pop psychology or
trendy self-help. It is solid wisdom and sound principles.
-- Richard M. Eyre, author of Life Balance and Teaching Children Values
We could do well to make the reading and use of this book a requirement for anyone at
any level of public service. It would be far more effective than any legislation regarding
ethical conduct.
-- Senator Jake Garn, first senator in space
When Stephen Covey talks, executives listen. -- Dun's Business Month
Stephen Covey's inspirational book will undoubtedly be the psychology handbook of the
'90s. The principles discussed are universal and can be applied to every aspect of life.
1
These principles, however, are like an opera. They cannot simply be performed, they
must be rehearsed!
 -- Ariel Bybee, mezzo-soprano, Metropolitan Opera
I found this book stimulating and thought-provoking. In fact, I keep referring to it.
-- Richard M. DeVos, President, Amway
 Winning is a habit. So is losing. Twenty-five years of experience, thought, and research
have convinced Covey that seven habits distinguish the happy, healthy, successful from
those who fail or who must sacrifice meaning and happiness for success in the narrow
sense.
-- Ron Zemke, coauthor of The Service Edge and Service America
Stephen R. Covey is a marvelous human being. He writes insightfully and he cares about
people.The equivalent of an entire library of success literature is found in this one
volume. The principles he teaches in The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People have
made a real difference in my life.
-- Ken Blanchard, Ph.D., author of The One-Minute Manager
The Seven Habits are keys to success for people in all walks of life. It is very thoughtprovoking.
-- Edward A. Brennan, Chairman, President and CEO, Sears, Roebuck and Company
Covey validates the durable truths as they apply to family, business, and society in
general, sparing us the psycho-babble that pollutes so much of current literature on
human relations. His book is not a photograph, but a process, and should be treated as
such. He is neither an optimist nor a pessimist, but a possibilist, who believes that we and
we alone can open the door to change within ourselves. There are many more than seven
good reasons to read this book.
 -- Steve Labunski, Executive Director, International Radio and Television Society
 Knowledge is the quickest and safest path to success in any area of life. Stephen Covey
has encapsulated the strategies used by all those who are highly effective. Success can be
learned and this book is a highly effective way to learn it.
-- Charles Givens, President, Charles J. Givens Organization, Inc., author of Wealth
Without Risk
I know of no one who has contributed more to helping leaders in our society than
Stephen R. Covey.... There is no literate person in our society who would not benefit by
reading this book and applying its principles
-- Senator Orrin G. Hatch
One of the greatest habits you can develop is to learn and internalize the wisdom of
Stephen Covey. He lives what he says and this book can help you live, permanently, in
the "Winner's Circle."
 -- Dr. Denis Waitley, author of The Psychology of Winning
 It's powerful reading. His principles of vision, leadership, and human relations make it a
practical teaching tool for business leaders today. I highly recommend it.
-- Nolan Archibald, President and CEO, Black and Decker
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People suggests a discipline for our personal
dealings withpeople which would be undoubtedly valuable if people stopped to think
about it.
-- James C. Fletcher, Director, NASA
 A wonderful contribution. Dr. Covey has synthesized the habits of our highest achievers
and presented them in a powerful, easy-to-use program. We now have a blueprint for
opening the American mind.
-- Charles Garfield, author of Peak Performer
Seven Habits is an exceptional book. It does a better job of inspiring a person to integrate
the different responsibilities in one's life -- personal, family, and professional – than any
other book I have read.
 -- Paul H. Thompson, Dean, Marriott School of Management, BYU and author of
Novation
Goodbye, Dale Carnegie. Stephen Covey has had a profound influence on my life. His
principles are powerful. They work. Buy this book. Read, it, and as you live the principles
your life will be enriched.
-- Robert G. Allen, author of Creating Wealth and Nothing Down
In the '90s America needs to unlock the door to increased productivity both on a business
and personal basis. The best way to accomplish this goal is through enhancing the human
resource. Dr. Covey's Seven Habits provides the guidelines for this to happen. These
principles make great sense and are right on target for the time.
-- F.G. "Buck" Rodgers, author of The IBM Way
This book is filled with practical wisdom for people who want to take control of their
lives, their business and their careers. Each time I read a section again I get new insights,
which suggests the messages are fundamental and deep.
-- Gifford Pinchot III, author of Intrapreneuring
Most of my learning has come from modeling after other people and what they do.
Steve's book helps energize this modeling process through highly effective research and
examples.
 -- Fran Tarkenton, NFL Hall of Fame quarterback
Not only does the "character ethic" win hands down every time over the "personality
ethic" in the battle of effectiveness, it also will bring greater fulfillment and joy to
individuals seeking meaning in their personal and professional lives.
-- Larry Wilson, author of Changing the Game: The New Way to Sell
Fundamentals are the key to success. Stephen Covey is a master of them. Buy this book,
but most importantly, use it!
-- Anthony Robbins, author of Unlimited Power
This book contains the kind of penetrating truth about human nature that is usually
found only in fiction. At the end, you will feel not only that you know Covey, but also
that he knows you
--Orson Scott Card, winner of the Hugo and Nebula Awards
In more than 25 years of working with people in business, university, and marriage and
family settings, I have come in contact with many individuals who have achieved an
incredible degree of outward success, but have found themselves struggling with an
inner hunger, a deep need for personal congruency and effectiveness and for healthy,
growing relationships with other people.
I suspect some of the problems they have shared with me may be familiar to you.
I've set and met my career goals and I'm having tremendous professional success. But it's
cost me my personal and family life. I don't know my wife and children anymore. I'm not
even sure I know myself and what's really important to me. I've had to ask myself -- is it
worth it?
I've started a new diet -- for the fifth time this year. I know I'm overweight, and I really
want to change. I read all the new information, I set goals, I get myself all psyched up
with a positive mental attitude and tell myself I can do it. But I don't. After a few weeks, I
fizzle. I just can't seem to keep a promise I make to myself.
I've taken course after course on effective management training. I expect a lot out of my
employees and I work hard to be friendly toward them and to treat them right. But I
don't feel any loyalty from them. I think if I were home sick for a day, they'd spend most
of their time gabbing at the water fountain. Why can't I train them to be independent and
responsible -- or find employees who can be?
My teenage son is rebellious and on drugs. No matter what I try, he won't listen to me.
What can I do?
 There's so much to do. And there's never enough time. I feel pressured and hassled
all day, every day, seven days a week. I've attended time management seminars and I've
tried half a dozen different planning systems. They've helped some, but I still don't feel
I'm living the happy, productive, peaceful life I want to live.
 I want to teach my children the value of work. But to get them to do anything, I have to
supervise every move; and put up with complaining every step of the way. It's so much
easier to do it myself. Why can't children do their work cheerfully and without being
reminded?
I'm busy -- really busy. But sometimes I wonder if what I'm doing will make a difference
in the long run. I'd really like to think there was meaning in my life, that somehow things
were different because I was here. I see my friends or relatives achieve some degree of
success or receive some recognition, and I smile and congratulate them enthusiastically.
But inside, I'm eating my heart out. Why do I feel this way? 
I have a forceful personality. I know, in almost any interaction, I can control the outcome.
Most of the time, I can even do it by influencing others to come up with the solution I
want. I think through each situation and I really feel the ideas I come up with are usually
the best for everyone. But I feel uneasy. I always wonder what other people really think
of me and my ideas.
My marriage has gone flat. We don't fight or anything; we just don't love each other
anymore. We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of things, but we just can't
seem to rekindle the feeling we used to have.
These are deep problems, painful problems -- problems that quick fix approaches can't
solve. A few years ago, my wife Sandra and I were struggling with this kind of concern.
One of our sons was having a very difficult time in school. He was doing poorly
academically; he didn't even know how to follow the instructions on the tests, let alone
do well in them. Socially he was immature, often embarrassing those closest to him.
Athletically, he was small, skinny, and uncoordinated -- swinging his baseball bat, for
example, almost before the ball was even pitched. Others would laugh at him.
 Sandra and I were consumed with a desire to help him. We felt that if "success" were
important in any area of life, it was supremely important in our role as parents. So we
worked on our attitudes and behavior toward him and we tried to work on his. We
attempted to psyche him up using positive mental attitude techniques. "Come on, son!
You can do it! We know you can. Put your hands a little higher on the bat and keep your
eye on the ball. Don't swing till it gets close to you." And if he did a little better, we would
go to great lengths to reinforce him. "That's good, son, keep it up."
When others laughed, we reprimanded them. "Leave him alone. Get off his back. He's
just learning." And our son would cry and insist that he'd never be any good and that he
didn't like baseball anyway.
Nothing we did seemed to help, and we were really worried. We could see the effect this
was having on his self-esteem. We tried to be encouraging and helpful and positive, but
after repeated failure, we finally drew back and tried to look at the situation on a
different level.
At this time in my professional role I was involved in leadership development work with
various clients throughout the country. In that capacity I was preparing bimonthly
programs on the subject of communication and perception for IBM's Executive
Development Program participants.
As I researched and prepared these presentations, I became particularly interested in how
perceptions are formed, how they behave. This led me to a study of expectancy theory
and self-fulfilling prophecies or the "Pygmalion effect," and to a realization of how deeply
imbedded our perceptions are. It taught me that we must look at the lens through which
we see the world, as well as at the world we see, and that the lens itself shapes how we
interpret the world.
As Sandra and I talked about the concepts I was teaching at IBM and about our own
situation, we began to realize that what we were doing to help our son was not in
harmony with the way we really saw him. When we honestly examined our deepest
feelings, we realized that our perception was that he was basically inadequate, somehow
"behind." No matter how much we worked on our attitude and behavior, our efforts were 
ineffective because, despite our actions and our words, what we really communicated to
him was, "You aren't capable. You have to be protected."
We began to realize that if we wanted to change the situation, we first had to change
ourselves. And to change ourselves effectively, we first had to change our perceptions.
At the same time, in addition to my research on perception, I was also deeply immersed
in an in-depth study of the success literature published in the United States since 1776. I
was reading or scanning literally hundreds of books, articles, and essays in fields such as
self-improvement, popular psychology, and self-help. At my fingertips was the sum and
substance of what a free and democratic people considered to be the keys to successful
living.
As my study took me back through 200 years of writing about success, I noticed a
startling pattern emerging in the content of the literature. Because of our own pain, and
because of similar pain I had seen in the lives and relationships of many people I had
worked with through the years, I began to feel more and more that much of the success
literature of the past 50 years was superficial. It was filled with social image
consciousness, techniques and quick fixes -- with social band-aids and aspirin that
addressed acute problems and sometimes even appeared to solve them temporarily -- but
left the underlying chronic problems untouched to fester and resurface time and again.
In stark contrast, almost all the literature in the first 150 years or so focused on what
could be called the character ethic as the foundation of success -- things like integrity,
humility, fidelity, temperance, courage, justice, patience, industry, simplicity, modesty,
and the Golden Rule. Benjamin Franklin's autobiography is representative of that
literature. It is, basically, the story of one man's effort to integrate certain principles and
habits deep within his nature.
The character ethic taught that there are basic principles of effective living, and that
people can only experience true success and enduring happiness as they learn and
integrate these principles into their basic character.
But shortly after World War I the basic view of success shifted from the character ethic to
what we might call the personality ethic. Success became more a function of personality,
of public image, of attitudes and behaviors, skills and techniques, that lubricate the
processes of human interaction. This personality ethic essentially took two paths: one was
human and public relations techniques, and the other was positive mental attitude
(PMA). Some of this philosophy was expressed in inspiring and sometimes valid maxims
such as "Your attitude determines your altitude," "Smiling wins more friends than
frowning," and "Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe it can achieve.
Other parts of the personality approach were clearly manipulative, even deceptive,
encouraging people to use techniques to get other people to like them, or to fake interest
in the hobbies of others to get out of them what they wanted, or to use the "power look,"
or to intimidate their way through life.
Some of this literature acknowledged character communication as an ingredient ofcommunication success, but tended to
compartmentalize it rather than recognize it as foundational and catalytic. Reference to
the character ethic became mostly lip service; the basic thrust was quick-fix influence
techniques, power strategies, communication skills, and positive attitudes communication.
Your power is limited only by your understanding and observance of natural law and
correct principles and by the natural consequences of the principles themselves.
You become a self-aware, knowledgeable, proactive individual, largely unrestricted by
the attitudes, behaviors, or actions of others.
Your ability to act reaches far beyond your own resources and encourages highly
developed levels of interdependency.
Your decisions and actions are not driven by your current financial or circumstantial
limitations.
You experience an interdependent freedom.
Remember that your paradigm is the source from which your attitudes and behaviors
flow. A paradigm is like a pair of glasses; it affects the way you see everything in your
life. If you look at things through the paradigm of correct principles, what you see in life
is dramatically different from what you see through any other centered paradigm.
I have included in the Appendix section of this book a detailed chart which shows how
each center we've discussed might possibly affect the way you see everything else. But
for a quick understanding of the difference your center makes, let's look at just one
example of a specific problem as seen through the different paradigms. As you read, try
to put on each pair of glasses. Try to feel the response that flows from the different
centers.
Suppose tonight you have invited your wife to go to a concert. You have the tickets; she's
excited about going. It's four o'clock in the afternoon.
All of a sudden, your boss calls you into his office and says he needs your help through
the evening to get ready for an important meeting at 9 A.M. tomorrow.
If you're looking through spouse-centered or family-centered glasses, your main concern
will be your wife. You may tell the boss you can't stay and you take her to the concert in
an effort to please her. You may feel you have to stay to protect your job, but you'll do so
grudgingly, anxious about her response, trying to justify your decision and protect
yourself from her disappointment or anger.
If you're looking through a money-centered lens, your main thought will be of the
overtime you'll get or the influence working late will have on a potential raise. You may
call your wife and simply tell her you have to stay, assuming she'll understand that
economic demands come first.
If you're work-centered, you may be thinking of the opportunity. You can learn more
about the job. You can make some points with the boss and further your career. You may
give yourself a pat on the back for putting hours well beyond what is required, evidence
of what a hard worker you are. Your wife should be proud of you!
If you're possession-centered, you might be thinking of the things the overtime income
could buy. Or you might consider what an asset to your reputation at the office it would
be if you stayed. Everyone would hear tomorrow how noble, how sacrificing and
dedicated you are.
If you're pleasure-centered, you'll probably can the work and go to the concert, even if
your wife would be happy for you to work late. You deserve a night out!
If you're friend-centered, your decision would be influenced by whether or not you had
invited friends to attend the concert with you. Or whether your friends at work were
going to stay late, too.
If you're enemy-centered, you may stay late because you know it will give you a big edge
over that person in the office who thinks he's the company's greatest asset. While he's off
having fun, you'll be working and slaving, doing his work and yours, sacrificing your
personal pleasure for the good of the company he can so blithely ignore.
If you're church-centered, you might be influenced by plans other church members have
to attend the concert, by whether or not any church members work at your office, or by
the nature of the concert -- Handel's Messiah might rate higher in priority than a rock
concert. Your decision might also be affected by what you think a "good church member"
would do and by whether you view the extra work as "service" or "seeking after material
wealth."
If you're self-centered, you'll be focused on what will do you the most good. Would it be
better for you to go out for the evening? Or would it be better for you to make a few
points with the boss? How the different options affect you will be your main concern.
As we consider various ways of looking at a single event, is it any wonder that we have
"young lady/old lady" perception problems in our interactions with each other? Can you
see how fundamentally our centers affect us? Right down to our motivations, our daily
decisions, our actions (or, in too many cases, our reactions), our interpretations of events?
That's why understanding your own center is so important. And if that center does not
empower you as a proactive person, it becomes fundamental to your effectiveness to
make the necessary Paradigm Shifts to create a center that will.
As a principle-centered person, you try to stand apart from the emotion of the situation
and from other factors that would act on you, and evaluate the option. Looking at the
balanced whole -- the work needs, the family needs, other needs that may be involved
and the possible implications of the various alternative decisions -- you'll try to come up
with the best solution, taking all factors into consideration.
Whether you go to the concert or stay and work is really a small part of an effective
decision. You might make the same choice with a number of other centers. But there are
several important differences when you are coming from a principle-centered paradigm.
First, you are not being acted upon by other people or circumstances. You are proactively
choosing what you determine to be the best alternative. You make your decisions
consciously and knowledgeably.
Second, you know your decision is most effective because it is based on principles with
predictable long-term results.
Third, what you choose to do contributes to your ultimate values in life. Staying at work
to get the edge on someone at the office is an entirely different evening in your life from
staying because you value your boss's effectiveness and you genuinely want to contribute
to the company's welfare. The experiences you have as you carry out your decisions take
on quality and meaning in the context of your life as a whole.
Fourth, you can communicate to your wife and your boss within strong networks you've
created in your interdependent relationships. Because you are independent, you can be
effectively interdependent. You might decide to delegate what is delegable and come in
early the next morning to do the rest.
And finally, you'll feel comfortable about your decision. Whatever you choose to do, you
can focus on it and enjoy it.
As a principle-centered person, you see things differently. And because you see things
differently, you think differently, you act differently. Because you have a high degree of
security, guidance, wisdom, and power that flows from a solid, unchanging core, you
have the foundation of a highly proactive and highly effective life.
Writing and Using a A Personal Mission Statement
 As we go deeply within ourselves, as we understand and realign our basic paradigms to
bring them in harmony with correct principles, we create both an effective, empowering
center and a clear lens through which we can see the world. We can then focus that lens
on how we, as unique individuals, relate to that world
 Frankl says we detect rather than invent our missions in life. I like that choice of words. I
think each of us has an internal monitor or sense, a conscience, that gives us an awareness
of our own uniqueness and the singular contributions that we can make. In Frankl's
words, "Everyone has his own specific vocation or mission in life. Therein he cannot be
replaced, nor can his life be repeated. Thus, everyone's task is as unique as is his specific
opportunity to implement it.
In seeking to give verbal expression to that uniqueness, we are again reminded of the
fundamental importance of proactivity and of working within our Circle of Influence. To
seek some abstract meaning to our lives out in our Circle of Concern is to abdicate our
proactive responsibility, to place our own first creation in the hands of circumstance and
other people.
 Our meaning comes from within. Again, in the words of Frankl, "Ultimately, man should
not ask what the meaning of his life is, but rather must recognize that it is he who is
asked. In a word, each man is questioned by life; and he can only answer to life by
answering for his own life; to life he can only respond by being responsible."
Personal responsibility, or proactivity, is fundamental to the first creation. Returning to
the computer metaphor, Habit 1 says "You are the programmer." Habit 2, then, says,
"Write the program." Until you accept the idea that you are responsible, that you are the
programmer, you won't really invest in writing the program.
As proactive people , we can begin to give expression to what we want to be and to do in
our lives. We can write a personal mission statement, a personal constitution.
A mission statement is not something you write overnight. It takes deep introspection,
careful analysis, thoughtful expression, and often many rewrites to produce it in final
form. It may take you several weeks or even months before you feel really comfortable
with it, before you feel it is a complete and concise expression of your innermost values
and directions. Even then, you will want to review it regularly and make minor changes
as the years bring additional insights or changing circumstances.
But fundamentally, your mission statement becomes your constitution, the solid
expression of your vision and values. It becomes the criterion by which you measure
everything else in your life.
I recently finished reviewing my own mission statement, which I do fairly regularly.
Sitting on the edge of a beach, alone, at the end of a bicycle ride, I took out my organizer
and hammered it out. It took several hours, but I felt a sense of clarity, a sense of
organization and commitment, a sense of exhilaration and freedom.
I find the process is as important as the product. Writing or reviewing a mission
statement changes you because it forces you to think through your priorities deeply,
carefully, and to align your behavior with your beliefs. As you do, other people begin to
sense that you're not being driven by everything that happens to you. You have a sense of
mission about what you're trying to do and you are excited about it.
Using Your Whole Brain
Our self-awareness empowers us to examine our own thoughts. This is particularly
helpful in creating a personal mission statement because the two unique human
endowments that enable us to practice Habit 2 -- imagination and conscience -- are
primarily functions of the right side of the brain. Understanding how to tap into that
right brain capacity greatly increases our first-creation ability.
A great deal of research has been conducted for decades on what has come to be called
brain dominance theory. The findings basically indicated that each hemisphere of the
brain -- left and right -- tends to specialize in and preside over different functions, process
different kinds of information, and deal with different kinds of problems.
Essentially, the left hemisphere is the more logical/verbal one and the right hemisphere
the more intuitive, creative one. The left deals with words, the right with pictures; the left
with parts and specifics, the right with wholes and the relationship between the parts.
The left deals with analysis, which means to break apart; the right with synthesis, which
means to put together. The left deals with sequential thinking; the right with
simultaneous and holistic thinking. The left is time bound; the right is time free.
 Although people use both sides of the brain, one side or the other generally tends to be
dominant in each individual. Of course, the ideal would be to cultivate and develop the
ability to have good crossover between both sides of the brain so that a person could first
sense what the situation called for and then use the appropriate tool to deal with it. But
people tend to stay in the "comfort zone" of their dominant hemisphere and process every
situation according to either a right- or left-brain preference.
 In the words of Abraham Maslow, "He that is good with a hammer tends to think
everything is a nail." This is another factor that affects the "young lady/old lady"
perception difference. Right-brain and left-brain people tend to look at things in different
ways.
We live in a primarily left-brain-dominant world, where words and measurement and
logic are enthroned, and the more creative, intuitive, sensing, artistic aspect of our nature
is often subordinated. Many of us find it more difficult to tap into our right-brain
capacity.
Admittedly this description is oversimplified and new studies will undoubtedly throw
more light on brain functioning. But the point here is that we are capable of performing 
many different kinds of thought processes and we barely tap our potential. As we
become aware of its different capacities, we can consciously use our minds to meet
specific needs in more effective ways.
Two Ways to Tap the Right Brain
If we use the brain dominance theory as a model, it becomes evident that the quality of
our first creation is significantly impacted by our ability to use our creative right brain.
The more we are able to draw upon our right-brain capacity, the more fully we will be
able to visualize, to synthesize, to transcend time and present circumstances, to project a
holistic picture of what we want to do and to be in life.
Expand Perspective
Sometimes we are knocked out of our left-brain environment and thought patterns and
into the right brain by an unplanned experience. The death of a loved one, a severe
illness, a financial setback, or extreme adversity can cause us to stand back, look at our
lives, and ask ourselves some hard questions:
"What's really important? Why am I doing what I'm doing?
But if you're proactive, you don't have to wait for circumstances or other people to create
perspective-expanding experiences. You can consciously create your own.
There are a number of ways to do this. Through the powers of your imagination, you can
visualize your own funeral, as we did at the beginning of this chapter. Write your own
eulogy. Actually write it out. Be specific.
You can visualize your twenty-fifth and then your fiftieth wedding anniversary. Have
your spouse visualize this with you. Try to capture the essence of the family relationship
you want to have created through your day-by-day investment over a period of that
many years.
You can visualize your retirement from your present occupation. What contributions,
what achievements will you want to have made in your field? What plans will you have
after retirement? Will you enter a second career?
 Expand your mind. Visualize in rich detail. Involve as many emotions and feelings as
possible. Involve as many of the senses as you can.
I have done similar visualization exercises with some of my university classes. "Assume
you only have this one semester to live," I tell my students, "and that during this semester
you are to stay in school as a good student. Visualize how you would spend your
semester.
Things are suddenly placed in a different perspective. Values quickly surface that before
weren't even recognized. I have also asked students to live with that expanded
perspective for a week and keep a diary of their experiences.
The results are very revealing. They start writing to parents to tell them how much they
love and appreciate them. They reconcile with a brother, a sister, a friend where the
relationship has deteriorated.
The dominant, central theme of their activities, the underlying principle, is love. The
futility of bad-mouthing, bad thinking, put-downs, and accusation becomes very evident
when they think in terms of having only a short time to live. Principles and values
become more evident to everybody.
There are a number of techniques using your imagination that can put you in touch with
your values. But the net effect of every one I have ever used is the same. When people
seriously undertake to identify what really matters most to them in their lives, what they
really want to be and to do, they become very reverent. They start to think in larger terms
than today and tomorrow.
Visualization and Affirmation
Personal leadership is not a singular experience. It doesn't begin and end with the writing
of a personal mission statement. It is, rather, the ongoing process of keeping your vision
and values before you and aligning your life to be congruent with those most important
things. And in that effort, your powerful right-brain capacity can be a great help to you
on a daily basis as you work to integrate your personal mission statement into your life.
It's another application of "Begin with the End in Mind."
Let's go back to an example we mentioned before. Suppose I am a parent who really
deeply loves my children. Suppose I identify that as one of my fundamental values in my
personal mission statement. But suppose, on a daily basis, I have trouble overreacting.
I can use my right-brain power of visualization to write an "affirmation" that will help me
become more congruent with my deeper values in my daily life.
A good affirmation has five basic ingredients: it's personal, it's positive, it's present tense,
it's visual, and it's emotional. So I might write something like this: "It is deeply satisfying
(emotional) that I (personal) respond (present tense) with wisdom, love, firmness, and
self-control (positive) when my children misbehave."
Then I can visualize it. I can spend a few minutes each day and totally relax my mind and
body can think about situations in which my children might misbehave. I can visualize
them in rich detail. I can feel the texture of the chair I might be sitting on, the floor under
my feet, the sweater I'm wearing. I can see the dress my daughter has on, the expression
on her face. The more clearly and vividly I can imagine the detail, the more deeply I will
experience it, the less I will see it as a spectator.
Then I can see her do something very specific which normally makes my heart pound
and my temper start to flare. But instead of seeing my normal response, I can see myself
handle the situation with all the love, the power, the self-control I have captured in my
affirmation. I can write the program, write the script, in harmony with my values, with
my personal mission statement.
And if I do this, day after day my behavior will change. Instead of living out of the scripts
given to me by my own parents or by society or by genetics or my environment, I will be
living out of the script I have written from my own self-selected value system.
I have helped and encouraged my son, Sean, to use this affirmation process extensively
throughout his football career. We started when he played quarterback in high school,
and eventually, I taught him how to do it on his own.
We would try to get him in a very relaxed state of mind through deep breathing and
progressive muscle relaxation technique so that he became very quiet inside. Then I
would help him visualize himself right in the heat of the toughest situations imaginable.
He would imagine a big blitz coming at him fast. He had to read the blitz and respond.
He would imagine giving audibles at the line after reading defenses. He would imagine
quick reads with his first receiver, his second receiver, his third receiver. He would
imagine options that he normally wouldn't do.
At one point in his football career, he told me he was constantly getting uptight. As we
talked, I realized that he was visualizing uptightness. So we worked on visualizing
relaxation in the middle of the big pressure circumstance. We discovered that the nature
of the visualization is very important. If you visualize the wrong thing, you'll produce the
wrong thing.
 Dr. Charles Garfield has done extensive research on peak performers, both in athletics
and in business. He became fascinated with peak performance in his work with the
NASA program, watching the astronauts rehearse everything on earth again and again in
a simulated environment before they went to space. Although he had a doctorate in
mathematics, he decided to go back and get another Ph.D. in the field of psychology and
study the characteristics of peak performers.
One of the main things his research showed was that almost all of the world-class athletes
and other peak performers are visualizers. They see it; they feel it; they experience it
before they actually do it. They Begin with the End in Mind.
You can do it in every area of your life. Before a performance, a sales presentation, a
difficult confrontation, or the daily challenge of meeting a goal, see it clearly, vividly,
relentlessly, over and over again. Create an internal "comfort zone." Then, when you get
into the situation, it isn't foreign. It doesn't scare you.
Your creative, visual right brain is one of your most important assets, both in creating
your personal mission statement and in integrating it into your life.
There is an entire body of literature and audio and video tapes that deals with this
process of visualization and affirmation. Some of the more recent developments in this
field include such things as subliminal programming, neurolinguistic programming, and
new forms of relaxation and self-talk processes. These all involve explanation,
elaboration, and different packaging of the fundamental principles of the first creation.
My review of the success literature brought me in contact with hundreds of books on this
subject. Although some made extravagant claims and relied on anecdotal rather than
scientific evidence, I think that most of the material is fundamentally sound. The majority
of it appears to have originally come out of the study of the Bible by many individuals.
In effective personal leadership, visualization and affirmation techniques emerge
naturally out of a foundation of well thought through purposes and principles that
become the center of a person's life. They are extremely powerful in rescripting and
reprogramming, into writing deeply committed-to purposes and principles into one's
heart and mind. I believe that central to all enduring religions in society are the same
principles and practices clothed in different language -- meditation, prayer, covenants,
ordinances, scripture study, empathy, compassion, and many different forms of the use
of both conscience and imagination.
But if these techniques become part of the personality ethic and are severed from a base
of character and principles, they can be misused and abused in serving other centers,
primarily the self center.
Affirmation and visualization are forms of programming, and we must be certain that we
do not submit ourselves to any programming that is not in harmony with our basic center
or that comes from sources centered on money-making, self interest, or anything other
than correct principles.
The imagination can be used to achieve the fleeting success that comes when a person is
focused on material gain or on "what's in it for me." But I believe the higher use of
imagination is in harmony with the use of conscience to transcend self and create a life of
contribution based on unique purpose and on the principles that govern interdependent
reality.
Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least
 --Goeth
 * *
Will you take just a moment and write down a short answer to the following two
questions? Your answers will be important to you as you begin work on Habit 3.
Question 1: What one thing could you do (you aren't doing now) that if you did on a
regular basis, would make a tremendous positive difference in your personal life?
Question 2: What one thing in your business or professional life would bring similar
results?
We'll come back to these answers later. But first, let's put Habit 3 in perspective
Habit 3 is the personal fruit, the practical fulfillment of Habits 1 and 2.
Habit 1 says, "You're the creator. You are in charge." It's based on the four unique human
endowments of imagination, conscience, independent will, and particularly, selfawareness.
It empowers you to say, "That's an unhealthy program I've been given from
my childhood, from my social mirror. I don't like that ineffective script. I can change."
Habit 2 is the first or mental creation. It's based on imagination -- the ability to envision,
to see the potential, to create with our minds what we cannot at present see without eyes;
and conscience -- the ability to detect our own uniqueness and the personal, moral, and
ethical guidelines within which we can most happily fulfill it. It's the deep contact with
our basic paradigms and values and the vision of what we can become.
Habit 3, then, is the second creation -- the physical creation. It's the fulfillment, the
actualization, the natural emergence of Habits 1 and 2. It's the exercise of independent
will toward becoming principle-centered. It's the day-in, day-out, moment-by-moment
doing it.
Habits 1 and 2 are absolutely essential and prerequisite to Habit 3. You can't become
principle-centered without first being aware of and developing your own proactive
nature. You can't become principle-centered without first being aware of your paradigms
and understanding how to shift them and align them with principles. You can't become
principle-centered without a vision of and a focus on the unique contribution that is
yours to make.
But with that foundation, you can become principle-centered, day-in and day-out,
moment-by-moment, by living Habit 3 -- by practicing effective self-management.
Management, remember, is clearly different from leadership. Leadership is primarily a
high-powered, right-brain activity. It's more of an art; it's based on a philosophy. You
have to ask the ultimate questions of life when you're dealing with personal leadership
issues.
But once you have dealt with those issues, once you have resolved them, you then have
to manage yourself effectively to create a life congruent with your answers. The ability to
manage well doesn't make much difference if you're not even in the "right jungle." But if
you are in the right jungle, it makes all the difference. In fact, the ability to manage well
determines the quality and even the existence of the second creation. Management is the
breaking down, the analysis, the sequencing, the specific application, the time-bound leftbrain
aspect of effective self-government. My own maxim of personal effectiveness is this:
Manage from the left; lead from the right.
The Power of Independent Will
In addition to self-awareness, imagination, and conscience, it is the fourth human
endowment -- independent will -- that really makes effective self-management possible. It
is the ability to make decisions and choices and to act in accordance with them. It is the
ability to act rather than to be acted upon, to proactively carry out the program we have
developed through the other three endowments.
The human will is an amazing thing. Time after time, it has triumphed against
unbelievable odds. The Helen Kellers of this world give dramatic evidence to the value,
the power of the independent will.
But as we examine this endowment in the context of effective self-management, we
realize it's usually not the dramatic, the visible, the once-in-a-lifetime, up-by-thebootstraps
effort that brings enduring success. Empowerment comes from the learning
how to use this great endowment in the decisions we make every day.
The degree to which we have developed our independent will in our everyday lives is
measured by our personal integrity. Integrity is, fundamentally, the value we place on
ourselves. It's our ability to make and keep commitments to ourselves, to "walk our talk."
It's honor with self, a fundamental part of the character ethic, the essence of proactive
growth.
Effective management is putting first things first. While leadership decides what "first
things" are, it is management that puts them first, day-by-day, moment-by-moment.
Management is discipline, carrying it out.
Discipline derives from disciple -- disciple to a philosophy, disciple to a set of principles,
disciple to a set of values, disciple to an overriding purpose, to a superordinate goal or a
person who represents that goal.
In other words, if you are an effective manager of your self, your discipline comes from
within; it is a function of your independent will. You are a disciple, a follower, of your
own deep values and their source. And you have the will, the integrity, to subordinate
your feelings, your impulses, your moods to those values.
One of my favorite essays is "The Common Denominator of Success," written by E. M.
Gray. He spent his life searching for the one denominator that all successful people share.
He found it wasn't hard work, good luck, or astute human relations, though those were
all important. The one factor that seemed to transcend all the rest embodies the essence of
Habit 3: Putting First Things First.
"The successful person has the habit of doing the things failures don't like to do," he
observed.
"They don't like doing them either necessarily. But their disliking is subordinated to the
strength of their purpose."
That subordination requires a purpose, a mission, a Habit 2 clear sense of direction and
value, a burning "Yes!" inside that makes it possible to say "no" to other things. It also
requires independent will, the power to do something when you don't want to do it, to be
a function of your values rather than a function of the impulse or desire of any given
moment. It's the power to act with integrity to your proactive first creation.
Four Generations of Time Management
In Habit 3 we are dealing with many of the questions addressed in the field of life and
time management. As a longtime student of this fascinating field, I am personally
persuaded that the essence of the best thinking in the area of time management can be
captured in a single phrase: Organize and execute around priorities. That phrase
represents the evolution of three generations of time-management theory, and how to
best do it is the focus of a wide variety of approaches and materials.
Personal management has evolved in a pattern similar to many other areas of human
endeavor. Major developmental thrusts, or "waves" as Alvin Toffler calls them, follow
each other in succession, each adding a vital new dimension. For example, in social
development, the agricultural revolution was followed by the industrial revolution,
which was followed by the informational revolution. Each succeeding wave created a
surge of social and personal progress.
Likewise, in the area of time management, each generation builds on the one before it --
each one moves us toward greater control of our lives. The first wave or generation could
be characterized by notes and checklists, an effort to give some semblance of recognition
and inclusiveness to the many demands placed on our time and energy.
The second generation could be characterized by calendars and appointment books. This
wave reflects an attempt to look ahead, to schedule events and activities in the future.
The third generation reflects the current time-management field. It adds to those
preceding generations the important idea of prioritization, of clarifying values, and of
comparing the relative worth of activities based on their relationship to those values. In
addition, it focuses on setting goals -- specific long-, intermediate-, and short-term targets
toward which time and energy would be directed in harmony with values. It also
includes the concept of daily planning, of making a specific plan to accomplish those
goals and activities determined to be of greatest worth.
While the third generation has made a significant contribution, people have begun to
realize that "efficient" scheduling and control of time are often counterproductive. The
efficiency focus creates expectations that clash with the opportunities to develop rich
relationships, to meet human needs, and to enjoy spontaneous moments on a daily basis.
As a result, many people have become turned off by time management programs and
planners that make them feel too scheduled, too restricted, and they "throw the baby out
with the bath water," reverting to first- or second-generation techniques to preserve
relationships, to meet human needs, and to enjoy spontaneous moments on a daily basis.
But there is an emerging fourth generation that is different in kind. It recognizes that
"time management" is really a misnomer -- the challenge is not to manage time, but to
manage ourselves. Satisfaction is a function of expectation as well as realization. And
expectation (and satisfaction) lie in our Circle of Influence.
Rather than focusing on things and time, fourth-generation expectations focus on
preserving and enhancing relationships and accomplishing results -- in short, on
maintaining the P/PC Balance.
Quadrant II
The essential focus of the fourth generation of management can be captured in the Time
Management Matrix diagrammed on the next page. Basically, we spend time in one of
four ways.
As you see, the two factors that define an activity are urgent and important. Urgent
means it requires immediate attention. It's "Now!" Urgent things act on us. A ringing
phone is urgent. Most people can't stand the thought of just allowing the phone to ring.
You could spend hours preparing materials, you could get all dressed up and travel to a
person's office to discuss a particular issue, but if the phone were to ring while you were
there, it would generally take precedence over your personal visit.
If you were to phone someone, there aren't many people who would say, "I'll get to you
in 15 minutes; just hold." But those same people would probably let you wait in an office
for at least that long while they completed a telephone conversation with someone else.
 Urgent matters are usually visible. They press on us; they insist on action. They're often
popular with others. They're usually right in front of us. And often they are pleasant,
easy, fun to do. But so often they are unimportant!
Importance, on the other hand, has to do with results. If something is important, it
contributes to your mission, your values, your high priority goals.
 We react to urgent matters. Important matters that are not urgent require more initiative,
more proactivity. We must act to seize opportunity, to make things happen. If we don't
practice Habit 2, if we don't have a clear idea of what is important, of the results we
desire in our lives, we are easily diverted into responding to the urgent.
Look for a moment at the four quadrants in the Time Management Matrix. Quadrant I is
both urgent and important. It deals with significant results that require immediate
attention. We usually call the activities in Quadrant I "crises" or "problems." We all have
some Quadrant I activities in our lives. But Quadrant I consumes many people. They are
crisis managers, problem-minded people, the deadline-driven producers.
As long as you focus on Quadrant I, it keeps getting bigger and bigger until it dominates
you. It's like the pounding surf. A huge problem comes and knocks you down and you're
wiped out. You struggle back up only to face another one that knocks you down and
slams you to the ground.
Some people are literally beaten up by the problems all day every day. The only relief
they have is in escaping to the not important, not urgent activities of Quadrant IV. So
when you look at their total matrix, 90 percent of their time is in Quadrant I and most of
the remaining 10 percent is in Quadrant IV with only negligible attention paid to
Quadrants II and III. That's how people who manage their lives by crisis live.
There are other people who spend a great deal of time in "urgent, but not important"
Quadrant III, thinking they're in Quadrant I. They spend most of their time reacting to
things that are urgent, assuming they are also important. But the reality is that the
urgency of these matters is often based on the priorities and expectations of others.
People who spend time almost exclusively in Quadrants III and IV basically lead
irresponsible lives. Effective people stay out of Quadrants III and IV because, urgent or
not, they aren't important. They also shrink Quadrant I down to size by spending more
time in Quadrant II. Quadrant II is the heart of effective personal management. It deals
with things that are not urgent, but are important. It deals with things like building
relationships, writing a personal mission statement, long-range planning, exercising,
preventive maintenance, preparation -- all those things we know we need to do, but
somehow seldom get around to doing, because they aren't urgent.
To paraphrase Peter Drucker, effective people are not problem-minded; they're
opportunity-minded. They feed opportunities and starve problems. They think
preventively. They have genuine Quadrant I crises and emergencies that require their
immediate attention, but the number is comparatively small. They keep P and PC in
balance by focusing on the important, but not the urgent, high-leverage capacity-building
activities of Quadrant II.
With the Time Management Matrix in mind, take a moment now and consider how you
answered the questions at the beginning of this chapter. What quadrant do they fit in?
Are they important? Are they urgent?
My guess is that they probably fit into Quadrant II. They are obviously important, deeply
important, but not urgent. And because they aren't urgent, you don't do them.
Now look again at the nature of those questions: What one thing could you do in your
personal and professional life that, if you did on a regular basis, would make a
tremendous positive difference in your life? Quadrant II activities have that kind of
impact. Our effectiveness takes the quantum leaps when we do them.
I asked a similar question to a group of shopping center managers. "If you were to do one
thing in your professional work that you know would have enormously positive effects
on the results, what would it be?" Their unanimous response was to build helpful
personal relationships with the tenants, the owners of the stores inside the shopping
center, which is a Quadrant II activity.
We did an analysis of the time they were spending on that activity. It was less than 5
percent. They had good reasons -- problems, one right after another. They had reports to
make out, meetings to go to, correspondence to answer, phone calls to make, constant
interruptions. Quadrant I had consumed them.
They were spending very little time with the store managers, and the time they did spend
was filled with negative energy. The only reason they visited the store managers at all
was to enforce the contract -- to collect the money or discuss advertising or other
practices that were out of harmony with center guidelines, or some similar thing.
The store owners were struggling for survival, let alone prosperity. They had
employment problems, cost problems, inventory problems, and a host of other problems.
Most of them had no training in management at all. Some were fairly good
merchandisers, but they needed help. The tenants didn't even want to see the shopping
center owners; they were just one more problem to contend with.
So the owners decided to be proactive. They determined their purpose, their values, their
priorities. In harmony with those priorities, they decided to spend about one-third of
their time in helping relationships with the tenants.
In working with that organization for about a year and a half, I saw them climb to around
20 percent, which represented more than a fourfold increase. In addition, they changed
their role. They became listeners, trainers, consultants to the tenants. Their interchanges
were filled with positive energy.
The effect was dramatic, profound. By focusing on relationships and results rather than
time and methods, the numbers went up, the tenants were thrilled with the results
created by new ideas and skills, and the shopping center managers were more effective
and satisfied and increased their list of potential tenants and lease revenue based on
increased sales by the tenant stores. They were no longer policemen or hovering
supervisors. They were problem solvers, helpers.
Whether you are a student at the university, a worker in an assembly line, a homemaker,
fashion designer, or president of a company, I believe that if you were to ask what lies in
Quadrant II and cultivate the proactivity to go after it, you would find the same results.
Your effectiveness would increase dramatically. Your crises and problems would shrink
to manageable proportions because you would be thinking ahead, working on the roots,
doing the preventive things that keep situations from developing into crises in the first
place. In the time management jargon, this is called the Pareto Principle -- 80 percent of
the results flow out of 20 percent of the activities.
What it Takes to Say "No"
The only place to get time for Quadrant II in the beginning is from Quadrants III and IV.
You can't ignore the urgent and important activities of Quadrant I, although it will shrink
in size as you spend more time with prevention and preparation in Quadrant II. But the
initial time for Quadrant II has come out of III and IV.
You have to be proactive to work on Quadrant II because Quadrant I and III work on
you. To say "yes" to important Quadrant II priorities, you have to learn to say "no" to
other activities, sometimes apparently urgent things.
Some time ago, my wife was invited to serve as chairman of a committee in a community
endeavor. She had a number of truly important things she was trying to work on, and she
really didn't want to do it. But she felt pressured into it and finally agreed.
Then she called one of her dear friends to ask if she would serve on her committee. Her
friend listened for a long time and then said, "Sandra, that sounds like a wonderful
project, a really worthy undertaking. I appreciate so much your inviting me to be a part
96
of it. I feel honored by it. For a number of reasons, I won't be participating myself, but I
want you to know how much I appreciate your invitation."
Sandra was ready for anything but a pleasant "no." She turned to me and sighed, "I wish
I'd said that."
I don't mean to imply that you shouldn't be involved in significant service projects. Those
things are important. But you have to decide what your highest priorities are and have
the courage --pleasantly, smiling, no apologetically -- to say "no" to other things. And the
way you do that is by having a bigger "yes" burning inside. The enemy of the "best" is
often the "good."
Keep in mind that you are always saying "no" to something. If it isn't to the apparent,
urgent things in your life, it is probably to the more fundamental, highly important
things. Even when the urgent is good, the good can keep you from your best, keep you
from your unique contributions, if you let it.
When I was Director of University Relations at a large university, I hired a very talented,
proactive, creative writer. One day, after he had been on the job for a few months, I went
into his office and asked him to work on some urgent matters that were pressing on me.
He said, "Stephen, I'll do whatever you want me to do. Just let me share with you my
situation."
Then he took me over to his wall board, where he had listed over two dozen projects he
was working on, together with performance criteria and deadline dates that had been
clearly negotiated before. He was highly disciplined, which is why I went to see him in
the first place. "If you want to get something done, give it to a busy man."
Then he said, "Stephen, to do the jobs that you want done right would take several days.
Which of these projects would you like me to delay or cancel to satisfy your request?"
Well, I didn't want to take the responsibility for that. I didn't want to put a cog in the
wheel of one of the most productive people on the staff just because I happened to be
managing by crisis at the time. The jobs I wanted done were urgent, but not important. So
I went and found another crisis manager and gave the job to him.
We say "yes" or "no" to things daily, usually many times a day. A center of correct
principles and a focus on our personal mission empowers us with wisdom to make those
judgments effectively.
As I work with different groups, I tell them that the essence of effective time and life
management is to organize and execute around balanced priorities. Then I ask this
question: if you were to fault yourself in one of three areas, which would it be:
(1) the inability to prioritize;
(2) the inability or desire to organize around those priorities; or
(3) the lack of discipline to execute around them, to stay with your priorities and
organization?
Most people say their main fault is a lack of discipline. On deeper thought, I believe that
is not the case. The basic problem is that their priorities have not become deeply planted
in their hearts and minds. They haven't really internalized Habit 2.
There are many people who recognize the value of Quadrant II activities in their lives,
whether they identify them as such or not. And they attempt to give priority to those
activities and integrate them into their lives through self-discipline alone. But without a
principle center and a personal mission statement, they don't have the necessary
foundation to sustain their efforts. They're working on the leaves, on the attitudes and the
behaviors of discipline, without even thinking to examine the roots, the basic paradigms
from which their natural attitudes and behaviors flow.
A Quadrant II focus is a paradigm that grows out of a principle center. If you are centered
on your spouse, your money, your friends, your pleasure, or any extrinsic factor, you will
keep getting thrown back into Quadrants I and III, reacting to the outside forces your life
is centered on. Even if you're centered on yourself, you'll end up in I and II reacting to the
impulse of the moment. Your independent will alone cannot effectively discipline you
against your center.
In the words of the architectural maxim, form follows function. Likewise, management
follows leadership. The way you spend your time is a result of the way you see your time
and the way you really see your priorities. If your priorities grow out of a principle center
and a personal mission, if they are deeply planted in your heart and in your mind, you
will see Quadrant II as a natural, exciting place to invest your time.
It's almost impossible to say, "no" to the popularity of Quadrant III or to the pleasure of
escape to Quadrant IV if you don't have a bigger "yes" burning inside. Only when you
have the self-awareness to examine your program -- and the imagination and conscience
to create a new, unique, principle-centered program to which you can say "yes" -- only
then will you have sufficient independent will power to say "no," with a genuine smile, to
the unimportant.
Moving Into Quadrant II
If Quadrant II activities are clearly the heart of effective personal management -- the "first
things" we need to put first -- then how do we organize and execute around those things
The first generation of time management does not even recognize the concept of priority.
It gives us notes and "to do" lists that we can cross off, and we feel a temporary sense of
accomplishment every time we check something off, but no priority is attached to items
on the list. In addition, there is no correlation between what's on the list and our ultimate
values and purposes in life. We simply respond to whatever penetrates our awareness
and apparently needs to be done.
Many people manage from this first-generation paradigm. It's the course of least
resistance. There's no pain or strain; it's fun to "go with the flow." Externally imposed
disciplines and schedules give people the feeling that they aren't responsible for results.
But first-generation managers, by definition, are not effective people. They produce very
little, and their life-style does nothing to build their Production Capability. Buffeted by
outside forces, they are often seen as undependable and irresponsible, and they have very
little sense of control and self-esteem.
Second-generation managers assume a little more control. They plan and schedule in
advance and generally are seen as more responsible because they "show up" when they're
supposed to.
But again, the activities they schedule have no priority or recognized correlation to
deeper values and goals. They have few significant achievements and tend to be
schedule-oriented.
Third-generation managers take a significant step forward. They clarify their values and
set goals. They plan each day and prioritize their activities.
As I have said, this is where most of the time-management field is today. But this third
generation has some critical limitations. First, it limits vision -- daily planning often
misses important things that can only be seen from a larger perspective. The very
language "daily planning" focuses on the urgent -- the "now." While third generation
prioritization provides order to activity, it doesn't question the essential importance of
the activity in the first place -- it doesn't place the activity in the context of principles,
personal mission, roles, and goals. The third-generation value-driven daily planning
approach basically prioritizes the Quadrant I and III problems and crises of the day.
In addition, the third generation makes no provision for managing roles in a balanced
way. It lacks realism, creating the tendency to over-schedule the day, resulting in
frustration and the desire to occasionally throw away the plan and escape to Quadrant
IV. And its efficiency, time-management focus tends to strain relationships rather than
build them.
While each of the three generations has recognized the value of some kind of
management tool, none has produced a tool that empowers a person to live a principlecentered,
Quadrant II life-style. The first-generation note pads and "to do" lists give us no
more than a place to capture those things that penetrate our awareness so we won't forget
them. The second-generation appointment books and calendars merely provide a place to
record our future commitments so that we can be where we have agreed to be at the
appropriate time.
Even the third generation, with its vast array of planners and materials, focuses primarily
on helping people prioritize and plan their Quadrant I and III activities. Though many
trainers and consultants recognize the value of Quadrant II activities, the actual planning
tools of the third generation do not facilitate organizing and executing around them.
As each generation builds on those that have preceded it, the strengths and some of the
tools of each of the first three generations provide elemental material for the fourth. But
there is an added need for a new dimension, for the paradigm and the implementation
that will empower us to move into Quadrant II, to become principle-centered and to
manage ourselves to do what is truly most important.
The Quadrant II Tool
The objective of Quadrant II management is to manage our lives effectively -- from a
center of sound principles, for a knowledge of our personal mission, with a focus on the
important as well as the urgent, and within the framework of maintaining a balance
between increasing our Production and increasing our Production Capability
This is, admittedly, an ambitious objective for people caught in the thick of thin things in
Quadrants III and IV. But striving to achieve it will have a phenomenal impact on
personal effectiveness.
A Quadrant II organizer will need to meet six important criteria.
 Coherence: Coherence suggests that there is harmony, unity, and integrity between your
vision and mission, your roles and goals, your priorities and plans, and your desires and
discipline. In your planner, there should be a place for your personal mission statement
so that you can constantly refer to it. There also needs to be a place for your roles and for
both short- and long-term goals.
Balance: Your tool should help you to keep balance in your life, to identify your various
roles and keep them right in front of you, so that you don't neglect important areas such
as your health, your family, professional preparation, or personal development.
Many people seem to think that success in one area can compensate for failure in other
areas of life. But can it really? Perhaps it can for a limited time in some areas. But can
success in your profession compensate for a broken marriage, ruined health, or weakness
in personal character? True effectiveness requires balance, and your tool needs to help
you create and maintain it.
Quadrant II Focus:. You need a tool that encourages you, motivates you, actually helps
you spend the time you need in Quadrant II, so that you're dealing with prevention
rather than prioritizing crises. In my opinion, the best way to do this is to organize your
life on a weekly basis. You can still adapt and prioritize on a daily basis, but the
fundamental thrust is organizing the week.
Organizing on a weekly basis provides much greater balance and context than daily
planning. There seems to be implicit cultural recognition of the week as a single,
complete unit of time. Business, education, and many other facets of society operate
within the framework of the week, designating certain days for focused investment and
others for relaxation or inspiration. The basic Judeo-Christian ethic honors the Sabbath,
the one day out of every seven set aside for uplifting purposes.
Most people think in terms of weeks. But most third-generation planning tools focus on
daily planning. While they may help you prioritize your activities, they basically only
help you organize crises and busywork. The key is not to prioritize what's on your
schedule, but to schedule your priorities. And this can best be done in the context of the
week.
A "People" Dimension: You also need a tool that deals with people, not just schedules.
While you can think in terms of efficiency in dealing with time, a principle-centered
person thinks in terms of effectiveness in dealing with people. There are times when
principle-centered Quadrant II living requires the subordination of schedules to people.
Your tool needs to reflect that value, to facilitate implementation rather than create guilt
when a schedule is not followed.
 Flexibility: Your planning tool should be your servant, never your master. Since it has to
work for you, it should be tailored to your style, your needs, your particular ways.
Portability: Your tool should also be portable, so that you can carry it with you most of
the time. You may want to review your personal mission statement while riding the bus.
You may want to measure the value of a new opportunity against something you already
have planned. If your organizer is portable, you will keep it with you so that important
data is always within reach.
Since Quadrant II is the heart of effective self-management, you need a tool that moves
you into Quadrant II. My work with the fourth-generation concept has led to the creation 